Now that we have defined our project activities we need to determine in what order these activities
need to be done. Some activities depend on others to
happen before they can even begin these are called dependencies. There is a tool and project management
called network diagramming or precedence diagramming that helps us
determine the most efficient sequence for our project activities. When sequencing project activities, project managers use precedent diagrams
to determine the relationships between activities in order to
develop the formal project schedule. Now we have discussed activity
dependencies before and it's where one activity is
dependent upon another activity. There are four types of dependencies for
activities. The first is called a mandatory
dependency and this is where one activity must happen before another and
there's just no way around it. The second activity is completely
dependent upon the first. An example of this is if you are wanting
to paint a wall of a new home, that wall must first be built. So in order to paint it, it must be built,
it must be there the next is called discretionary dependencies and
this is where an activity should happen before another, but
it's not absolutely necessary. So an example of that would be if we
wanted to paint that same wall before we moved in furniture into the house, we we
should paint the wall before we move in furniture but
it doesn't have to happen that way. So we would call that
the discretionary dependency. Another dependency is called
an external dependency and this comes from outside your project. So in order to paint the wall, the paint supplier must deliver
the paint to the house. So we're depending on
an external supplier, some from from outside the project and
then the last is called an internal dependency and
this comes from within your project. So an example might be that
we're using our own painters to paint the house and
those painters must finish painting the kitchen before they
start painting the bedroom. So in order to complete the bedroom
painting job, we need the labor or the resources from the kitchen to complete
in order to start painting the bedroom. Now let's take a look at something
called precedence diagramming and this is used to help the project manager
further examine dependencies and make a determination of
the project's critical path. The critical path is determined by
building a diagram to determine the earliest possible completion date for
the project. So again, the critical path is
the earliest possible completion date. In order to do this,
we need to understand diagramming. So let's start first with
a precedents diagram. Here's a square and
this square is it's it's called a node and this node represents an activity
that needs to happen for our project and
let's call that activity A and here's another node and
let's call that one activity B. Now let's say that we need to complete
activity A in order to start activity B. So activity B is completely dependent
upon activities A's completion. The arrow represents the dependency, we call this finish to start dependency. Now let's look at a simplified example,
so assume we're planting a garden and we want to plant tomatoes,
peppers, herbs, etcetera. You get it, let's say activity A. Is preparing the dirt for
planting, then ACTIVITY B. Is digging the hole to plant the tomato. Now we would have to make
sure that ACTIVITY A. Is completed before ACTIVITY B. Can start. Of course we need dirt in the garden
before we can begin to plant anything. Now let's take a look at finish to finish
and this is a different type of dependency but it's where both activities
should be finished at the same time. An example would be if we were to
pick tomatoes from our garden to make a fresh salad. The tomatoes need to be harvested or
finished growing before we can serve and assemble the salad. We call that finish to finish next. Let's look at start to start and
this is where activities A must start before activity B, but
these are usually done simultaneously. An example would be,
let's say your instead of a gardener, you're a farmer and
in order to plant your seeds for crops. You need to plow the land and
we know that we can do the plowing and the planting at the same time,
but first the plowing starts, then the seeds are dropped into
the ground and then planted. So these must be done in order but
you can do them at the same time. That's an example of a start to start and
then we have start to finish and that's where ACTIVITY A must start
before ACTIVITY B can finish. It's very rare that we use
a start to finish, but I just at least want to introduce
that dependency to you. Now, here's an example of a simplified
precedents diagram on the left, we have the project start,
we start with activity A. And in order to move on to Activities B
and C, we must first complete Activity A. Activities B and C can be done
in parallel and simultaneously, but ACTIVITY B must be complete in order
to start ACTIVITY D, activity C and D. Can both finish at the same time,
which would be the end of the project. So that's a of an overall simple example
of what a precedence diagram looks like, as you can see many activities in our
project can depend upon one another. The precedents diagram allows us to
visually see these dependencies. It is an important step when it comes to
developing the actual project schedule